[[edited slightly for clarification since it was originally posted ... wjc]]

Message-ID: <1992Feb11.174506.22769@cbnewsh.cb.att.com>
References: <1992Feb4.204509.27726@cbfsb.att.com>
	<1992Feb10.155710.8064@cbfsb.att.com>
Newsgroups: att.news,att.exptools,att.emacs
From: billc@pegasus.ATT.COM (Bill Carpenter)
Subject: GNUemacs sources (was Re: local gnuemacs to be removed on Feb. 11)
Organization: AT&T Bell Laboratories
Distribution: att
Date: Tue, 11 Feb 1992 17:45:06 GMT
In-Reply-To: tgt@cbnewsg.cb.att.com's message of Mon, 10 Feb 1992 15: 57:10 GMT

tgt> The local copy of gnuemacs (in /usr/add-on/server/gnuemacs) will
tgt> be removed from the netnews servers tomorrow, February 11th.

The cbnews administrators have graciously let us park some of the
sources there for a while, but other arrangements have now been made.
This is a note about where to find GNUemacs sources, locally and afar.

GENERAL
=======
GNUemacs is an outside tool supported through the exptools mechanism
in Bell Labs and some other AT&T machines.  Due to disk space
constraints and because not everyone wants it, there are some things
that we don't distribute automatically.  For one thing, the C source
files are only of use to a very small number of folks.  The
byte-compiled versions of elisp files are distributed because the
non-compiled versions are quite a bit larger and are really only
needed for reference and mystery solving.

THE SUPER OFFICIAL NO-KIDDING PLACE
===================================
The "master" copies of the officially distributed GNUemacs sources are
available via anonymous FTP from prep.ai.mit.edu; however, you
probably don't want to bother with this, since the same thing is
available within AT&T already (described below).  For more information
about the master (non-exptools) source distribution, you might like to
read these exptools files:

	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/dist/etc/DISTRIB
	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/dist/etc/FTP
	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/dist/etc/COPYING

Again, the only reason full sources are not provided in exptools is
because it gets replicated on so many different disks.

OUR ARCHIVES
============
Sources for everything distributed in exptools GNUemacs are available
via anonymous FTP from bell1.hdtv.att.com (see the further note below
about using FTP).  Here's the basic directory structure:

	/pub/gnuemacs/
	              Readme.before.getting.anything
	              What_do_I_do
	              doc/
	              src/
	                  emacs-18.57.tar.Z
	                  exptools_src.tar.Z
	                  Elisp-Sources/
	                                dist/
	                                local/
	              sun3/
	              sun4/

Most folks will just be interested in getting copies of a few
uncompiled elisp files.  These are located under

	/pub/gnuemacs/src/Elisp-Sources/dist/
	/pub/gnuemacs/src/Elisp-Sources/local/

The directory hierarchy there parallels the locations of elisp files
under $TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/.  By the way, you can also have a look at
the byte-compiled elisp under $TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/ and sometimes get
the answers to simple questions.  Even though it is byte-compiled,
much of it is still human-readable.  This might save you a certain
amount of trouble in some cases.

If you're looking for something that's not in the exptools GNUemacs
distribution, you're not likely to find it in this archive either.
You might find a pointer to it by browsing around the "tips"
directory, though.  (Which reminds me to tell you that it's not quite
true that everything in the exptools distribution is in those
archives.  The master copies of the files from the "tips" directory are
maintained elsewhere.  That's an artifact of distributed providership,
but you can read them on any exptools machine anyhow.)

Other Interesting Things in the Archives
----------------------------------------
/pub/gnuemacs/doc/*
	Sources for documentation for GNUemacs and various add-on
	packages.  Most is in TeXinfo format; some is in postscript
	format.  If you have only a few questions about something, you
	might find it simpler to just browse the online documentation
	in GNUemacs.  Many of the add-on packages that are included in
	the exptools package have their own "info" nodes.  Do "M-x info"
	to see what's available online.

/pub/gnuemacs/src/emacs-18.57.tar.Z
	This is the "official" stuff that is used as the base for the
	exptools distribution when it's built.  If you just want plain
	vanilla GNUemacs without exptools enhancements, this is what
	you want.  Obviously, the version number part of the filename
	changes as the version number of GNUemacs that we're using
	changes.

/pub/gnuemacs/src/exptools_src.tar.Z
	The sources for everything in the exptools distribution.  This
	is a rather large package and includes the "official" base as
	well as several add-on packages.  (Note:  The "official" base
	included herein is not guaranteed to exactly match the stuff
	available in emacs-18.57.tar.Z.)  The average person will
	almost certainly find it easier to get exptools installed and
	use GNUemacs from there than to try to deal with this package.

/pub/gnuemacs/sun[34]/
	These are prebuilt and packaged up copies of the sun3 and sun4
	versions of exptools GNUemacs, in your choice of tar or cpio
	format.  These packages are made available this way because
	it's easy for the providers (and because sun4 exptools has
	GNUemacs available, but sun3 currently doesn't).  If you can
	get things through exptools, you're better off (you'll get
	automatic updates, etc).  If you get the files in one of these
	directories, also get /pub/gnuemacs/What_do_I_do.

ABOUT ANONYMOUS FTP
===================
The ftp command can be used to fetch things from the above-mentioned
archive site.  This is not a complete description of the FTP process,
but is intended to get you started if you don't know anything about it
already.

If you have the ftp command on your machine, that's the best place to
use it.  If you're not sure, ask your system administrator or a
knowledgable user.  You should at least browse through the lengthy ftp
manual page.

If you don't have the ftp command on any of the machines you normally
use, you can use it from the cbnews* machine on which you have a
login.  However, using ftp from cbnews* is not the preferred route if
you can avoid it.  Obviously, anything you fetch to cbnews* will have
to be transferred to your home machine anyhow, and it's best to avoid
the double transfer.  Also, if you are transferring a relatively large
amount of data, you'll be clogging up what is essentially a public
facility.  That's anti-social.  So, if you can, use ftp on some other
machine and use cbnews* only as a last resort (keep us all out of hot
water).

To use what's commonly called anonymous FTP, first connect to the
remote machine, e.g., "some.place.att.com", using the command line:

	$ ftp some.place.att.com
	Name (some.place.att.com:somebody): ftp
	Password (some.place.att.com:ftp):
	ftp>

When prompted for "Name", enter "ftp" (some places want you to enter
"anonymous", but most places accept either).  When prompted for a
password, enter your email address (this is a courtesy to let people
know who's using their archives).  When you see the "ftp>" prompt,
you're in.  When you're done with FTP and want to get out, the command
is "bye".

The number 1 rule of anonymous FTP is to be polite, since you're using
someone else's resources.  If you can, do anything but trivial
transfers during off-hours, since many ftp archive sites are also used
for real work during prime time (or all the time).  You're also using
up network bandwidth to do the transfer.  When considering
"off-hours", don't forget to take the timezone of the other machine
into consideration.  Some sites don't allow ftp during what they
consider prime time, but even if they do, a little judgement on your
part will help preserve the overall spirit of cooperation.

If you're trying to reach an AT&T site, and you get "unknown host" or
some similar error, you might not be on the AT&T R&D Internet (check with
your system administrator or a knowledgable user).  If you're trying
to get to a site outside AT&T, you will almost certainly have to use
proxy ftp ("pftp"), which is briefly described below.  If ftp fails
for some other reason, you may be able to just try again later and
have it work.  Network congestion sometimes leads to spurious
problems.

Once at the "ftp>" prompt, give the command "hash" and then the
command "binary":

	ftp> hash
	ftp> binary
	ftp>

(To see what these do, read the ftp man page.)  From this point, use
"cd" to move to another directory.  Use "ls" to see what's in a
directory.  Use "get" or "mget" to actually transfer files:

	ftp> get that.file
	ftp> mget some.files.*

It's a good idea to do "ls -la" to see how big things are before doing
a "get".  Some of the things in our archive are over 8MB, for example.

If you're trying to get to a site outside AT&T, you will probably have
to use proxy ftp; the command is "pftp".  Other than having a
different name, it acts just like the normal ftp command.  The
difference is that it transparently uses a gateway machine to bridge
onto the external internet.  A nice side benefit of proxy ftp is that
you can use a DATAKIT link to get as far as the AT&T gateway machine,
so for that you don't need to be on the AT&T R&D Internet.  If you don't
have the pftp command on your machine, ask your system administrator
or a knowledgeable user if s/he can install it for you.  The sources
for the proxy package are available via anonymous FTP from
toucan.att.com; look for /outgoing/newproxy.tar.Z.
-- 
  Bill                      William_J_Carpenter@ATT.COM        or
  (908) 576-2932            attmail!bill   or   att!pegasus!billc
  AT&T Bell Labs / AT&T EasyLink Services               LZ 1E-207
(unofficial GNUemacs guy)
