[[Last Modified: Fri Jul 21 19:35:48 EDT 1995]]

[[Look for general news and announcements about NNTP service in the
newsgroup att.news.  Look for general news and announcements about
GNUemacs in newsgroup att.emacs.]]

This note is a description of how to use the GNUS newsreading package
of exptools GNUemacs with the NNTP service offered by cbnews.  It's
not a general description of how to use GNUS or GNUemacs.  For more
information about GNUS and/or GNUemacs, see the files under
$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/tips/ and, while in GNUemacs, do "M-x info".

Contents of this note:

	INTRODUCTION
	WHAT IS NNTP SERVICE?
	OLD vs NEW NNTP SERVICE
	TCP/IP vs DATAKIT
	HOW TO USE THE TCP/IP TRANSPORT (the default for GNUS)
	HOW TO USE THE DATAKIT TRANSPORT
	THE AUTHENTICATION STEP
	GNUEMACS VARIABLES
	NON-EXPTOOLS GNUEMACS USERS
	COMMON PROBLEMS
	WHO YA GONNA CALL?

INTRODUCTION
============
The cbnews maintainers are now offering NNTP service for reading
netnews.  We have made some small local modifications to the GNUS
newsreader package to accommodate the cbnews-specific authentication.
GNUS is distributed as part of the exptools package "gnuemacs".

WHAT IS NNTP SERVICE?
=====================
NNTP is a (de facto) standard way of reading news remotely.  A server
machine actually stores the netnews articles and administrative
overhead (this is no different than it always has been).  Users on
client machines run news readers on those local client machines,
usually using the same user interface that they've become used to.
Behind the scenes, rather than directly reading articles and other
information from disk files, a networked conversation takes place
between the client and the server.  That's already more than you
actually need to know about how it works to be able to use it
effectively.

Advantages for you in reading news via NNTP service include:

(1)  Using local CPU cycles, which will generally give better
performance than having the equivalent number of users logged directly
onto the server machine.  (The CPU usage of NNTP daemon processes is
remarkably low.)

(2)  Using local storage.  Not only can you freely use as much space as
local policy allows, but files that you might need to include in
replies, etc, are right where you want them to be.  No untidy hopping from
machine to machine.

(3)  If you're using GNUS as your newsreader, it's just another thing
going on in a couple of GNUemacs windows.  You can easily task switch
between GNUS and other stuff you're doing.  If you were running GNUS
on a server machine, there probably wouldn't be other things to switch
to.

(4)  It's what all the cool kids are using!  :-)

The principal user-visible disadvantage to using NNTP is that network
congestion can sometimes degrade the performance you see.  Whether or
not that happens to you depends on what you're doing, what the other
traffic is, what program you're using as your user interface to NNTP
(i.e., what newsreader), and, of course, what the performance is like on
the server you normally used.

Since cbnews is providing NNTP versions of the cbnews-supported
newsreaders and code for converting others, and the GNUemacs providers
(and me :-) are doing the right thing with GNUS, you should be able to
switch to NNTP service to check it out with relative ease (of course,
there is some minor setup, like copying your ~/.newsrc file from
cbnews to your home machine and going through an authentication step).

Although GNUS users don't actually need it to get started using NNTP,
we recommend that you ask your system administrator to obtain and
install the NNTP client package on your home machine.  That package
will contain the latest connectivity and authentication instructions,
and will also bring the benefits of NNTP to non-GNUS users at your
site.  The NNTP client package can be obtained from USTOP.  Check out
the periodic postings in att.news and att.netnews for more specific
information.

OLD vs NEW NNTP SERVICE
=======================
As of February 1994, cbnews started offering "Netnews Phase II".
Under this plan, direct login access to the "cbnews*" machines will be
mostly phased out.  Most customers will eventually be using NNTP
access served by one of the new "nntp*" machines.

The information in this note applies only to getting going on the new
"nntp*" servers.  If you haven't been using GNUS via NNTP already,
then you shouldn't even bother trying to get it going on a "cbnews*"
machine.

If you are currently using a "cbnews*" machine, you should probably
switch to an "nntp*" machine as soon as convenient.

TCP/IP vs DATAKIT
=================
The cbnews-supported newsreaders can select between using TCP/IP and
DATAKIT for network transport via a compile-time option, depending on
what's available on your machine.  For GNUS, you choose at run time
via GNUemacs variable settings and other minor customizations.  (If
you use a modem to connect to cbnews, you won't be able to use NNTP.)

Which one should you pick?  Well, obviously, if you only have TCP/IP
or only have DATAKIT, you should go with the one that you have.  If
you have both transports available to you, you can easily switch back
and forth between them (in separate GNUS sessions) and see which gives
you better performance.  (There are no user interface differences
between the two, so performance is pretty much the only decision
factor.)

Based on past experience, most people will see dramatically better
performance using TCP/IP rather than DATAKIT.  Of course, as they say,
past performance is no guarantee of future earnings.  Since the
recommended way for all NNTP users is TCP/IP, maybe the traffic will
pick up to the extent that it will rival DATAKIT.  Or, maybe it will
stay as comparably fast as it is today.

HOW TO USE THE TCP/IP TRANSPORT (the default for GNUS)
======================================================
To be able to use the TCP/IP transport, you have to be able to reach
your cbnews server ("nntp*") via telnet.  For a quick test, try:

	$ telnet nntpX.cb.att.com 119

(where nntpX is the appropriate machine for you).  If you get an
NNTP greeting, you have connectivity.  If you get a message like
"cannot reach nntpX" or something similar, it means that there is no
link between the network you're on and the network that the cbnews
machines are on.  In short, you're not connected to the ATTBL R&D
Internet, and you can't use the TCP/IP transport.  [[I don't know how
you can get connected to the R&D Internet; ask your system
administrator or a knowledgable local user about it.]]

If you are using a SUN, your copy of GNUemacs will have built into it
a function called open-network-stream.  If you are using some other
platform but happen to have TCP/IP support, you will probably not have
that function built in, and you'll have to define it.  To do that, put
this line somewhere in your ~/.emacs file so that it's evaluated
before you run GNUS (*don't* do this on a SUN):

	(require 'tcptelnet)

That will define open-network-stream so that it gives you a connection
via a "telnet" subprocess.  "telnet" must be on your PATH before you
run GNUemacs.  There is a performance penalty and an inelegance
factor in connecting this way, so don't use it unless you have to.
[If your "telnet" command happens to be called something else, like
"mytelnet", then you can (setq tcptelnet-program-name "mytelnet").]

After you have done the authentication step (see below), use GNUS as
usual.  Your per-session authentication will be taken care of mostly
automatically for you.

HOW TO USE THE DATAKIT TRANSPORT
================================
To be able to use the DATAKIT transport, you have to have the "dk"
command and you have to be able to call your cbnews server using "dk".

There is no DATAKIT support built into any version of exptools
GNUemacs.  To use DATAKIT, put this line somewhere in your ~/.emacs
file so that it's evaluated before you run GNUS:

	(require 'tcpdk)

That will define open-network-stream so that it gives you a connection
via a "dk" subprocess.  "dk" must be on your PATH before you run
GNUemacs.  [If your "dk" command happens to be called something else,
like "mydk", then you can (setq tcpdk-program-name "mydk").]  

It is possible for a somewhat industrious souls to get this to work
using "dkcu" instead of "dk" (there's more to it than that, of
course).  If you are trying that, don't forget that "dkcu" recognizes
file redirection tilde sequences from the remote end.  That makes it
both an inconvenience and a security problem.  If you can't cook up a
"dkcu" that ignores those sequences, we recommend that you not use
"dkcu" for the NNTP transport.

After you have done the authentication step (see below), use GNUS as
usual.  Your per-session authentication will be taken care of
automatically for you.

THE AUTHENTICATION STEP
=======================
[[You should watch for official news about authentication and other NNTP
admin stuff in newsgroups att.news and att.netnews.  The stuff below
is an unofficial synopsis and is a bit GNUS-ocentric.]]

GNUS was actually written with NNTP in mind, so most of the required
features are in the standard package.  The cbnews NNTP package uses
additional user authentication which is not part of standard NNTP.
Our local mods to GNUS take care of the per-session authentication,
but you must set up your authorization to begin with.

The process is slightly different for TCP/IP versus DATAKIT.  You
should use whichever is appropriate to the transport you're using (and
if you might be using both transports, then go through both types of
authentication).

For TCP/IP, run this command from your client machine:

	$ telnet nntpX.cb.att.com 1119

(Notice the number is 1119, not 119.)  Of course, "nntpX" is the
name of a server machine where you already have a login.

For DATAKIT, run this command from your client machine:

	$ dk nntpX.nntpauth

Of course, "nntpX" is the name of a server machine where you
already have a login.  You may have to supply the area code and
exchange for the dial string, depending on your local situation.

BTW, the cbnews folks recommend that if your last name starts with
A-M, you use nntpa.  If N-Z, use nntpb.

If you have trouble with the set up of the authentication, contact
postmaster@netnews.att.com (this step applies to all NNTP users and is
independent of GNUS).  If you have authentication problems while in a
GNUS session, you should see a buffer with advice about what to do to
resolve it; if you don't see such a buffer, contact me or a GNUemacs
provider.

After you have gone through the authentication step above, you will
have given the NNTP server a password for NNTP service.  DON'T FORGET
IT!  (Good advice, no?)  By the way, don't forget your password.  And,
just in case you didn't get the idea, you should remember your
password.

Next, you'll be creating a local file with an MD5 hash of your
password in it.  Run this program:

	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/etc/md5cbnews

It will prompt you for a password (use the same one) and create a file
called ~/.nntpauth.  By default, the file is created only readable by
you, and you should leave it that way since anyone with access to that
file can masquerade as you in an NNTP session.  (If there is no such
program on your machine, look for

	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/etc/md5cbnews.c

and follow directions in the comments at the top.  Or, delete the file
~/.nntpauth and run any cbnews supported NNTP newsreader (not GNUS) at
least through the authentication step.  Those programs also create the
~/.nntpauth file.)

From time to time, you will receive a message about an expired entry
on the NNTP servers.  When you do, just redo the authentication steps
and you'll be prompted for a new password.  Locally, re-run md5cbnews
to regenerate the ~/.nntpauth file with the new password information.
Did I mention that you should remember that password?

If this is the first time you will be using Phase II servers ("nntp*"
machines), your ~/.newsrc file will be way out of whack.  The best
thing you can probably do is get rid of it (and ~/.newsrc.el)
completely and start over.  At the beginning of your first session,
GNUS will automatically subscribe you to all of the groups.  (If you
keep your old ~/.newsrc, you probably won't see articles in most of
the groups because the "nntp*" machines have very low article numbers,
and GNUS will think you've already read them.)

See also GNUEMACS VARIABLES below.

GNUEMACS VARIABLES
==================
If you were previously using GNUS on one of the cbnews servers, almost
all of your variable settings will probably be okay.

When you're setting the server name, either via the shell environment
variable NNTPSERVER or the GNUemacs variable gnus-nntp-server, you
should use a complete host name (e.g., "oh/cbh/nntpb" or
"nntpb.cb.att.com") appropriate to the transport you're using.  In any
case, don't use the DATAKIT form when using TCP/IP transport, or vice
versa).  (On some inconveniently administered machines, you may have
to use IP numbers for TCP/IP instead of a host name.  On such
machines, you will probably be unable to do the command for setting up
authentication anyhow.  Your only resort is to ask your system
administrator to fix things up for you.)

For per-session authentication when talking to a Phase II server
("nntp*"), you should have a line something like this in your
~/.emacs:

	(setq cbnews-authinfo-method "md5")

This tells GNUS to use the information from your ~/.nntpauth file and
force-feed the authentication to the server.

For other GNUS-related variables and customizations, see the GNUS
manual or online "info" subsystem in GNUemacs.  When you get around to
trying to post something, I recommend you first try some postings to
one or more of the AT&T internal test groups (e.g., "att.test"), since
folks often end up with news headers different from what they're
expecting the first few times around.

NON-EXPTOOLS GNUEMACS USERS
===========================
If you have a GNUemacs site that isn't part of exptools, you can still
use our local mods.  Pick up the following files from any exptools
machine:

	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/lisp/nntp.elc
	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/lisp/nntpcbnews.elc
	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/lisp/tcpdk.elc
	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/lisp/tcptelnet.elc

Our local changes were based on GNUS 3.13, but we believe they will
work okay with GNUS 3.12 and the beta GNUS 3.14 (untested, though).
"nntp.elc" is a replacement for the file that comes with GNUS.  The
other files are local additions.  (If you want the *.el sources for
these files [not a bad idea, but not strictly necessary], see:

	$TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/tips/GettingSources

You might also like to have a browse around that "tips" directory for
a copy of this file and other handy tips.

If you have nntp.el from another version of GNUS, you might be able to
just add this line at the bottom of it:

	(require 'nntpcbnews)

and things might work.  However, nntpcbnews.el redefines some things
from nntp.el, so there is no guarantee.

COMMON PROBLEMS
===============
This stuff works and lots of folks are using it already.  Even before
the official NNTP service announcement, beta testers were using it for
months.  As with any other part of life in the '90s, lots of little
things can go wrong.  Here are some things you can do to try to
isolate problems if GNUS doesn't just work.

  o  Re-read all of this message.  We get many problem reports that
     were actually about things done contrary to information in this
     note.  We don't mind the false alarms much, but you may be on the
     air sooner if, just like in the SATs, you re-check your work.
     This note is also updated periodically to reflect the latest
     info, so if it's been a while since you read it, grab a fresh
     copy and have another glance ($TOOLS/lib/gnuemacs/local/tips/GNUSandNNTP).

  o  When trying to isolate problems, it is helpful to try things from
     a fresh GNUemacs session.  That is, fire up GNUemacs and do only
     the steps necessary to run GNUS.  This will eliminate a lot of
     unrelated factors.

  o  Are you authorized properly?  If you're using DATAKIT transport,
     you must have gone through the DATAKIT authorization method.
     Ditto for TCP/IP.  It's okay to authorize both ways if you might
     be using both transport methods.  (I'm not sure this matters for
     Phase II stuff, though.)

  o  Are you specifying your server properly?  Be sure you're using a
     dialstring (slashes) for DATAKIT transport and domains (dots) for
     TCP/IP.

  o  If you have an authentication problem after the NNTP dialog
     starts up, you'll probably see a GNUemacs window with an
     explanation of what's going on.  The explanations closely
     parallel the messages seen by users of cbnews-supported
     newsreaders.  On the other hand, if there is a connectivity
     problem and you don't get as far as starting up the NNTP dialog,
     then things may just seem hung.  You might see a message
     something like "NNTP: Reading {0}..." in the message buffer.
     This condition is most commonly caused by something mentioned
     already.

  o  If you session seems hung on startup or dies mysteriously at some
     later time, you may be able to find valuable clues in the NNTP
     dialog buffer.  Wait 30 seconds or so to make sure it's not just
     some temporary bottleneck, then C-g to interrupt GNUS' NNTP
     interaction.  Depending on where you are in the session, you may
     have to C-g a second time.  Before quitting GNUS, switch to a
     buffer named " *nntpd" (notice the leading space in the buffer
     name; it doesn't show up in the buffer menus).  This is the
     buffer where the actual NNTP dialog takes place, and a variety of
     enlightening remarks about failures often show up there.

  o  If all that fails, or if you just run out of patience trying
     things, then ask for help.  See the next section.

Here are a couple of "fine tuning" notes about running GNUS and NNTP.
(They're not really "common problems".)

  o  If you are using the DATAKIT transport, your performance is
     probably on the lame side.  You can improve the situation a bit
     by using a buffering trick.  I'm not sure exactly why this makes
     a difference, but I know it makes a significant one.

        * in your ~/.emacs, do this:

                (setq tcpdk-program-name "dknntp")

        * somewhere on your $PATH, create a shell script called
          "dknntp" with the following contents:

                cat | dk oh/cbh/nntpa.nntp | cat

          (of course, use "nntpb" if that's your server)

     This has the effect of buffering I/O of the "dk" command.  It
     costs some extra processes, though.


   o Suppose GNUS tells you "nntpd not running".  That usually means
     your session was timed out by the NNTP server or the connection
     was dropped for some other reason.  If you just type M-x gnus at
     that point, you probably get an authentication failure and are
     asked to re-run md5cbnews.  If instead you first quit GNUS ("q")
     and then do M-x gnus, all should be well (it's not necessary to
     exit GNUemacs).

     This happens because of the way I put the force-feeding of
     authentication into the innards of GNUS.  I could fix it with
     some trouble, but the workaround is so easy that I probably won't
     bother.

WHO YA GONNA CALL?
==================
Get the NNTP Client Package from USTOP; problems with NNTP (but not
related to GNUS nor GNUemacs) should be reported to
nntp-support@netnews.att.com (netnews!nntp-support).  Other general
netnews-related problems should be addressed to
postmaster@netnews.att.com (netnews!postmaster).  Remember, the
cbnews folks support NNTP service and the NNTP client package, but
they're not directly involved in the support of GNUS.

General problems and questions about GNUemacs and/or any of the
packages provided with it should go to the GNUemacs providers (on an
exptools machine, run "providers gnuemacs").

Problems and questions about the GNUS mods to use cbnews NNTP can come
to me or the GNUemacs providers.

Of course, problems and questions about just about any aspect of
GNUemacs can go to att.emacs or one of the non-AT&T emacs-related
newsgroups.  You can also consult the local GNUemacs experts (most
places seem to have at least a few).

Random GNUemacs and GNUS user comments are also welcome in att.emacs
(apply "random" wherever it suits you best :-).
-- 
  Bill@attmail.com                    billc@pegasus.ATT.COM    or
  (Voice/Fax) +1.908.576.2932         William_J_Carpenter@ATT.COM
  AT&T Bell Labs                                        LZ 1C-320
(GNUemacs helper-outer, GNUS-via-NNTP ConnectMeister)

